---
title: 'Bernadette: Bayesian Inference and Model Selection for Stochastic Epidemics in R'
tags:
  - Bayesian
  - Epidemics
  - R
  - Stan
authors:
  - name: Lampros Bouranis
    orcid: 0000-0002-1291-2192
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - name: "Department of Statistics, Athens University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece"
    index: 1
date: "2023-09-25"
bibliography: paper.bib
output:
  md_document:
    preserve_yaml: TRUE
    variant: "markdown_strict"
journal: JOSS
link-citations: yes
csl: apa.csl
---

# Summary

The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak caused by SARS-CoV-2
has led to developments in Bayesian infectious disease modeling,
allowing modelers to assess the impact of mitigation strategies on
transmission and to quantify the burden of the pandemic. The
`Bernadette` package ([Bouranis, 2023](#ref-bernadette)) for the
open-source R statistical software ([R Core Team, 2023](#ref-rsoft))
implements a Bayesian evidence synthesis approach to modeling the
age-specific transmission dynamics of a disease based on daily mortality
counts. The functionality of `Bernadette` can be used to reconstruct the
epidemic drivers from publicly available data, to estimate key
epidemiological quantities like the rate of disease transmission, the
latent counts of infections and the reproduction number for a given
population over time, and to perform model comparison using information
criteria. While `Bernadette` is motivated by the analysis of healthcare
surveillance data related to COVID-19, it provides a template for
implementation to a broader range of infectious disease epidemics and
outbreaks.

# Statement of need

The modeling of disease transmission dynamics is an active research
area; a list of R packages dedicated to the analysis of epidemics is
presented in the R Epidemics Consortium website
(<https://www.repidemicsconsortium.org/>). Among these packages,
`EpiEstim` ([Cori et al., 2013](#ref-Cori2013); [Cori,
2021](#ref-epiestim)) offers a data-driven Bayesian framework for the
reconstruction of the time-varying reproduction number of a disease
which represents the number of secondary infections generated by a case
infected at day *t*. `EpiEstim` uses areal time-series in the form of
case counts for a given period and population. The incidence of
infection is assumed to follow a Poisson process with expectation given
by a renewal equation. The `epidemia` package ([Scott et al.,
2020](#ref-epidemia)) links observed areal data to latent infections,
which are in turn modeled as a self-exciting process tempered by
time-varying reproduction numbers. It also supports Bayesian multilevel
models by pooling information across multiple populations.

`Bernadette` complements these packages by implementing the Bayesian
hierarchical modeling approach described in Bouranis et al.
([2022](#ref-bouranis)). It links the observed age-stratified mortality
counts for the population of a given country over time to latent
infections via an over-dispersed count model. The change in infections
over time is governed by a deterministic multi-type compartmental model
which is driven by potentially non-scalar diffusion processes to
adequately capture the temporal evolution of the age-stratified
transmission rates. `Bernadette` relaxes the assumption of a homogeneous
population, incorporates age structure and accounts for the presence of
social structures via publicly available contact matrices. This allows
for further evidence synthesis utilizing information from contact
surveys and for sharing statistical strength across age groups and time.
Further, the Bayesian evidence synthesis approach implemented in the
`Bernadette` package enables learning the age-stratified virus
transmission rates from one group to another, with a particular focus on
the transmission rate between and onto vulnerable groups which could
support public health authorities in devising interventions targeting
these groups. The effective reproduction number is estimated from the
daily age-stratified mortality counts, accounting for variations in
transmissibility that are not obvious from reported infection counts.
While estimation of the uncertainty over the effective reproduction
number is itself a challenging problem ([Gostic et al.,
2020](#ref-gostic)), it is propagated naturally via Markov chain Monte
Carlo ([Brooks et al., 2011](#ref-brooks)).

# Functionality

`Bernadette` features eight main functions for data processing and
visualization, a main function for specifying and fitting the Bayesian
hierarchical model and five functions for post-processing and
visualization of posterior model estimates of important epidemiological
quantities. The Github page for this package contains a detailed
[README](https://github.com/bernadette-eu/Bernadette/blob/master/README.md)
file with a description of the modeling framework and the steps involved
in the workflow.

## Data processing and visualization

1.  `age_distribution`: Imports the age distribution of a country for a
    given year, broken down by 5-year age bands and gender, following
    the United Nations 2019 Revision of World Population Prospects.
2.  `aggregate_age_distribution`: Aggregates the age distribution
    according to user-defined age groupings.
3.  `contact_matrix`: For a given country, it imports a 16 by 16 contact
    matrix whose row *i* of a column *j* corresponds to the number of
    contacts made by an individual in group *i* with an individual in
    group *j*.
4.  `aggregate_contact_matrix`: Aggregates the contact matrix according
    to user-defined age groupings.
5.  `aggregate_ifr_react`: Aggregates the age-specific Infection
    Fatality Ratio (IFR) estimates reported by the REACT-2 large-scale
    community study of SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence in England ([Ward et
    al., 2021](#ref-ward_react2)) according to age group mappings
    defined by the user.
6.  `itd_distribution`: Parameterizes the time distribution from an
    infection to an observation. `Bernadette` focuses on observed
    mortality counts, therefore we refer to this distribution as the
    *infection-to-death distribution*.
7.  `plot_age_distribution`: visualizes a given age distribution using a
    bar plot.
8.  `plot_contact_matrix`: visualizes a given contact matrix using a
    heatmap.

The age-specific time series of mortality counts and the age-specific
time series of cumulative reported infections complete the list of data
streams that are integrated together with expert knowledge into a
coherent modeling framework via a Bayesian evidence synthesis approach
for estimation of key epidemiological quantities. Two example datasets
(objects `age_specific_mortality_counts` and
`age_specific_cusum_infection_counts`) are provided with the
`Bernadette` package to guide the user regarding the format of their
input.

## Parameter estimation

The main function for Bayesian parameter estimation, `stan_igbm`, allows
for specification of a joint distribution for the outcomes (in this
case, the age-specific mortality counts) and the unknown quantities,
which is expressed by the likelihood for the outcomes conditional on the
unknowns multiplied by a marginal prior distribution for the unknowns.
This joint distribution is proportional to the posterior distribution of
the unknowns conditional on the observed data. Prior beliefs for the
unknown model parameters can be expressed by a selection of appropriate
distributions available to the end-user. `Bernadette` uses the framework
offered by the probabilistic programming language `Stan` ([Carpenter et
al., 2017](#ref-carpenter2017stan)) to specify a model and draw from the
posterior distribution using MCMC. The user-specified model is
internally translated into data that are passed to a precompiled `Stan`
program and then it is fit using sampling methods from `rstan` ([Stan
Development Team, 2023](#ref-rstan)).

## Post-processing

The output of `stan_igbm` contains draws from the posterior
distribution, which can be post-processed and visualized to extract
insights about the mechanism of disease transmission over a given
period.

1.  `plot_posterior_cm`: Density plots of the posterior distribution of
    the random contact matrix.
2.  `posterior_infections`: Summarizes the posterior distribution of the
    infection counts over time (age-specific and aggregated). It is
    accompanied by the plotting function `plot_posterior_infections`.
3.  `posterior_mortality`: Summarizes the posterior distribution of the
    mortality counts over time (age-specific and aggregated). It is
    accompanied by the plotting function `plot_posterior_mortality`.
4.  `posterior_transmrate`: Summarizes the posterior distribution of the
    age-specific transmission rate. It is accompanied by the plotting
    function `plot_posterior_transmrate`.
5.  `posterior_rt`: Summarizes the posterior distribution of the
    time-varying reproduction number. The posterior trajectory is
    visualized with `plot_posterior_rt`.

The output of `stan_igbm` can additionally be used to compute
approximate leave-one-out cross-validation with the `loo` R package
([Vehtari et al., 2023](#ref-psisloo2)). This enables estimation of
information criteria which are considered when comparing among a set of
alternative models for the same data.

# Licensing and Availability

The `Bernadette` package is licensed under the GNU General Public
License (GPL v3.0). It is available on CRAN, and can be installed using
`install.packages("Bernadette")`. All code is open-source and hosted on
GitHub, and bugs can be reported at
<https://github.com/bernadette-eu/Bernadette/issues/>.

# Acknowledgements

Lampros Bouranis’ research is supported by the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie
grant agreement No 101027218.

# References

Bouranis, L. (2023). *<span class="nocase">Bernadette: Bayesian
inference and model selection for stochastic epidemics</span>*.
<https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=Bernadette>

Bouranis, L., Demiris, N., Kalogeropoulos, K., & Ntzoufras, I. (2022).
*<span class="nocase">Bayesian analysis of diffusion-driven multi-type
epidemic models with application to COVID-19</span>*. arXiv.
<https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.15229>

Brooks, S., Gelman, A., Jones, G., & Meng, X. (2011). *<span
class="nocase">Handbook of Markov chain Monte Carlo</span>*. CRC press.

Carpenter, B., Gelman, A., Hoffman, M., Lee, D., Goodrich, B.,
Betancourt, M., Brubaker, M., Guo, J., Li, P., & Riddell, A. (2017).
Stan: A probabilistic programming language. *Journal of Statistical
Software*, *76*(1), 1–32. <https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v076.i01>

Cori, A. (2021). *<span class="nocase">EpiEstim: Estimate time varying
reproduction numbers from epidemic curves</span>*.
<https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=EpiEstim>

Cori, A., Ferguson, N., Fraser, C., & Cauchemez, S. (2013). <span
class="nocase">A new framework and software to estimate time-varying
reproduction numbers during epidemics</span>. *American Journal of
Epidemiology*, *178*(9), 1505–1512. <https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwt133>

Gostic, K., McGough, L., Baskerville, E., Abbott, S., Joshi, K.,
Tedijanto, C., Kahn, R., Niehus, R., Hay, J., De Salazar, P., Hellewell,
J., Meakin, S., Munday, J., Bosse, N., Sherrat, K. e., Thompson, R.,
White, L., Huisman, J., Scire, J., … Cobey, S. (2020). <span
class="nocase">Practical considerations for measuring the effective
reproductive number, Rt</span>. *PLoS Computational Biology*, *16*(12),
1–21. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008409>

R Core Team. (2023). *R: A language and environment for statistical
computing*. R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
<https://www.R-project.org/>

Scott, J., Gandy, A., Mishra, S., Unwin, J., Flaxman, S., & Bhatt, S.
(2020). *<span class="nocase">epidemia: Modeling of epidemics using
hierarchical Bayesian models</span>*.
<https://imperialcollegelondon.github.io/epidemia/>

Stan Development Team. (2023). *RStan: The R interface to Stan*.
<https://mc-stan.org/>

Vehtari, A., Gabry, J., Magnusson, M., Yao, Y., Bürkner, P., Paananen,
T., & Gelman, A. (2023). *<span class="nocase">loo: Efficient
leave-one-out cross-validation and WAIC for Bayesian models</span>*.
<https://mc-stan.org/loo/>

Ward, H., Atchison, C., Whitaker, M., Ainslie, K., Elliott, J., Okell,
L., Redd, R., Ashby, D., Donnelly, C., Barclay, W., Darzi, A., Cooke,
G., Riley, S., & Elliott, P. (2021). <span class="nocase">SARS-CoV-2
antibody prevalence in England following the first peak of the
pandemic</span>. *Nature Communications*, *12*, 905.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-21237-w>
